thesis-text.md, before:

# Some Links

Medvěd: https://mj.ucw.cz/vyuka/bc/

Hajič Jr. thesis proposal: http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~zabokrtsky/pgs/thesis_proposal/jan-hajic-jr-proposal.pdf
A Starting Point for Handwritten Music Recognition: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=SygqKLQrXQ
From Optical Music Recognition to Handwritten Music Recognition: A baseline: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0167865518303386
Handwritten Music Recognition for Mensural notation with convolutional recurrent neural networks: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0167865519302338

HTR (TU Wien): https://repositum.tuwien.ac.at/obvutwhs/download/pdf/2874742


# Abstract

Optical music recognition is a challenging field similar in many ways to optical text recognition. It brings, however, many challenges that traditional pipeline-based recognition systems struggle with. The end-to-end approach has proven to be superior in the domain of handwritten text recognition. We tried to apply this approach to the field of OMR. Specifically, we focused on handwritten music recognition. To resolve the lack of training data, we developed an engraving system for handwritten music called Mashcima. This engraving system is successful at mimicking the style of the CVC-MUSCIMA dataset. We evaluated our model on a portion of the CVC-MUSCIMA dataset and the approach seems to be promising.


# Introduction

> Co je OMR

Optical music recognition (OMR) is an interesting subfield of computer vision. It shares a lot of similarities to optical character recognition (OCR) and handwritten text recognition (HTR). It is, however, more challenging as is pointed out in the paper *Understanding Optical Music Recognition* (https://arxiv.org/pdf/1908.03608.pdf). For example in OCR, characters are read in one direction, typically from left to right. Musical symbols seem to be similar in that a staff is also read from left to right, but many symbols can be placed above each other. Piano scores can even have symbols that span multiple staves.

Although a musical score can be very complex, many scores are not. We can limit ourselves to scores that are monophonic, have a single voice and have symbols spanning only one staff. Monophonic scores lack chords, meaning there's only one note plaing at a time. This holds, for example, for windblown instruments, since they cannot play multiple notes simulatenously. Sometimes multiple voices (instruments) are engraved in a single staff to save space. We will not attempt to read these scores either. It would be like reading two lines of text simultaneously and the proposed model can output only a single sequence. Also deciding what voice a given note belongs to is in itself a complicated problem.

> v HTR se používá RCNN, protože je fajn (https://repositum.tuwien.ac.at/obvutwhs/download/pdf/2874742) nebo (http://www.jpuigcerver.net/pubs/jpuigcerver_icdar2017.pdf)
> Jednak, druhak jsem ji vybral, protože s ním mám zkušennosti, třeťak Calvo 2018 ji taky použil

Deep neural networks have transformed the field of computer vision recently. Especially convolutional networks (CNN), whose architecture is particularly well suited for image processing. Recurrent neural networks (RNN) have been used for sequence processing, like natural language modelling or natural language translation. We can combine these two architectures to create a so called RCNN network. When trained using connectionist temporal classification (CTC), we get a powerful architecture that is ideal for processing visual sequential data (http://www.jpuigcerver.net/pubs/jpuigcerver_icdar2017.pdf). This architecture has been used in handwritten text recognition to yield state-of-the-art results (https://repositum.tuwien.ac.at/obvutwhs/download/pdf/2874742).

> tuhle architekturu zkusil Calvo 2018 na primusu

If we limit the complexity of musical scores to the point that a single staff can be represented as a sequence of tokens, we can use this architecture to tackle to problem of OMR. This approach has been tried in 2018 by Calvo-Zaragoza and Rizo in 2018 (https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/8/4/606). They created the PrIMuS dataset, which contains 87678 real-music incipits. An incipit is the part of a melody or a musical work that is most recognizable for that work. Each incipit is a few measures long, typically shorter than a single staff of printed sheet music would be.

> primus je nice and all, ale je sázenej, jenže hodně not je ručně psanejch (to je ta díra co plním)

The resulting model has been compared against Audiveris, an open-source OMR tool (https://github.com/Audiveris), and has proven to be superior on the PrIMuS dataset. However the dataset contains printed images only. Since this RCNN architecture is an end-to-end approach, there's a great chance that it would be ideal for reading handwritten scores as well (drawing analogy from HTR).

> my tohle chceme zkusit na ručně psaných *The goal of this thesis is: ...*

Therefore the goal of this thesis is to explore the end-to-end approach for optical music recognition of handwritten music scores. More specifically we want to train a RCNN network to yield the best possible results on the CVC-MUSCIMA dataset.

> narazili jsme na nedostatek dat

We needed to obtain training data. We explored the *Collection of datasets for OMR* by Alexander Pacha (https://apacha.github.io/OMR-Datasets/) and quickly found out that the only dataset containing entire staves of handwritten sheet music is the CVC-MUSCIMA dataset (http://www.cvc.uab.es/cvcmuscima/index_database.html). Every other handwritten dataset contains only muscial symbols or is derived from CVC-MUSCIMA. Since CVC-MUSCIMA is intended for writer classification and staff removal, it contains only 20 parts, each written by 50 writers. That's far too small variability, given the task we are trying to solve.

> takže součástí práce je taky Mashcima

Facing this issue we resorted to data augmentation. The idea is to take handwritten musical symbols and place them onto an empty staff to create a new staff image. We called this music engraving system *Mashcima* and the system is explained in the chapter [M](#M). The muscial symbols used by Mashcima come from the MUSCIMA++ dataset (https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/muscima). This dataset is built on top of CVC-MUSCIMA and provides pixel-perfect symbol segmentation and relationships between symbols. The reason we chose MUSCIMA++, instead of other musical symbol datasets, is that it is built on top of CVC-MUSCIMA. This means the image resolution and overall style is consistent with CVC-MUSCIMA. Also MUSCIMA++ has been developed at Charles University and so it was easy to contact its creator when needed. We however do make sure, that the final evaluation is performed on data the neural network has not seen during training. Specifically it trains on staves by completely different writers than the ones used for evaluation.

Mashcima engraving system is the main feature that sets this thesis apart from other works. Other people, when faced with the lack of training data, use simple data augentation (dilation, blurring, distortion) or transfer learning (https://openreview.net/pdf?id=SygqKLQrXQ). We belive that custom engraving system for hadwritten music is the best way to produce overabundance of high quality training data. Our confidence stems from the fact, that non-trained human has difficulties distinguishing a real-world sample from a well-engraved one.

    figure comparing one staff from CVC-MUSCIMA and one from PrIMuS, engraved using Mashcima

> jak práce dopadla - úspěch nebo ne?

It is difficult to evaluate an OMR system in general. This is because there is no standard dataset that can be used and no standard set of metrics. Moreover we proposed a new Mashcima representation for the music engraved in a staff. This representation is based on the agnostic encoding proposed by Calvo-Zaragoza and Rizo (https://grfia.dlsi.ua.es/primus/). Using custom representation makes it yet more difficult to compare our results to other works. That being said, we can still make some comparisons. It seems that having specialized engraving system is a step in the right direction. The results we obained when evaluating are comparable to simmilar works performing simmilar evaluation (https://openreview.net/pdf?id=SygqKLQrXQ).

> MusicXML nebylo implementováno
> Image preprocessing nebyl implementován, máme už binarizovaný vstup

The thesis assignment states that output of our model will be a MusicXML file. We quickly realized that the problem is far larger then anticipated and so we focused on the core features only. Similarly the model input is not a plain photo or scan. It is already preprocessed and binarized. This problem has already been solved during the creation of the CVC-MUSCIMA dataset (http://www.cvc.uab.es/cvcmuscima/index_database.html).


## Thesis outline

**Chapter X:** Proč end-to-end, proč RCNN+CTC, výhody, nevýhody, viz log - proces vymýšlení, vícekanálová CTC, problémy

**Chapter X:** Reprezentace výstupu sítě (Mashcima representation)

**Chapter X:** Engraving system Mashcima, jak funguje, jakou má strukturu

**Chapter X:** Experiments and results (jak vypadají experimenty, jak dopadly)


# Related Work

> TODO ... vypiš hlavní práce o které se opíráš a co zajímavého z nich používáš.

- SimpleHTR
- Calvo-Zaragoza and Rizo, PrIMuS
- CVC-MUSCIMA
- MUSCIMA++


# Deep Neural Network

> Tradiční systémy používají pipeline

> deep NN spojují celou pipeline do jednoho celku, learned features

> CTC umožňuje neřešit alignment, snazší anotace

> multi channel CTC attempts


# Music Representation

- Inspirováno Primusem, ale drobné změny
- proč agnostic a ne semantic
    - menší abeceda, jednodušší generátor mashcima
- míň ukecaný než u primusu, aby se dalo lépe anotovat ručně - vizuelní podobnost
- symetrické - pozice 0 je uprostřed
- Co se generuje vs. co lze anotovat
- Pitch information
- Attachments
- Jak lze rozšířit do budoucna (dynamika, akordy) ... tohle ale spíš do závěru tady jen odkaz


## PrIMuS agnostic encoding

The PrIMuS dataset contains over 87 000 items, each with an image of the printed staff and then multiple files describing the music in that staff. There are two standard formats, namely Music Encoding Initiative format (MEI) and the Plaine and Easie code source. Then there are two on-purpouse encodings devised specifically for this dataset. These two encodings are what interests us.

    figure containing a sample incipit

The first of these two encodings is the *semantic encoding*. It represents what the musical symbols mean. Each symbol has a specific pitch that relies on the cleft at the begining of the staff. This makes the vocabulary much larger and any model using this encoding has take the clef into account when reading the symbols. It is however much easier to transform this encoding to some well known format like MusicXML, since these formats tend to represent the meaning of a score, not the score appearence.

    semantic encoding of the incipit above

The second encoding is the *agnostic encoding*. This encoding treats the staff visually as a specific positioning of specific symbols. It tries to capture what is in the staff visually, not what the symbols mean musically. This is comparable to a sentence being thought of as a sequence of letters, whereas the semantic encoding could be thought of as the specific sounds a written sentence represents. This makes the encoding harder to convert to a well known format acceptable by other music software. On the other hand this encoding is formal-enough to be easily converted to the semantic encoding, if read correctly. So this encoding lets the model do less work, therefore the model should do fewer mistakes.

    agnostic encoding of the incipit above

The agnostic encoding has also the advantage, that annotating an image is not as difficult for a human. Annotating an image using the semantic encoding requires the annotator to know pitches for a given key. The situation is even more complicated by key signatures. This means an untrained non-musician has to do a lot of thinking when annotating, which leads to many errors and slow annotation speed.

We've taken this agnostic encoding and modified it slightly to produce our Mashcima music representation.


## Mashcima music representation


## Differences to PrIMuS


## Extensibility


# Engraving System


# Experiments and Results


# Conclusion and Future Works

> - rozšíření na akordy
> - rozšíření na dynamiku (mf, ff, pp, hairpins, ...)


# XXX `Content layout and notes`

V čem je end-to-end výhodné? (tzn. proč to vůbec prozkoumávám?)
- ručně vybraný fičury nebejvaj nejlepší, lepší je se interní fičury naučit
    (ideálně nějakej odkaz do Deep Leraning book na deep sítě)
- chyby v prvních fázích pipeline způsobují lavinový efekt chyb

Proč jsem zvolil RCNN+CTC? (jako konkrétní realizaci end-to-end modelu)
1) používá to SimpleHTR a od něho jsem se odpíchnul
2) díky CTC nemusím řešit alignment (segmentaci)
- z čeho jiného bych mohl vybírat?

Proč jsem zvolil CVC-MUSCIMA na evaluaci?
1) snadno lze anotovat, protože se díla opakují
2) z datasetů co jsou na výběr vyšel nejlíp https://apacha.github.io/OMR-Datasets/
    - je handwritten, obsahuje celé sheety, mám k němu MUSCIMA++ na symboly
    - je to jediný single-staff handwritten na výběr, ostatní na něm staví
        nebo to jsou pouze datasety symbolů

Na čem trénovat model?
- CVC-MUSCIMA nestačí, moc malý, malá variabilita
- žádný jiný na výber není
- použiju augmentaci dat -> vygeneruju nová data přeházením symoblů z CVC-MUSCIMY
    - jak dostanu symboly? Ty už mám v MUSCIMA++, použiju tu
    - dostanu anotace zadarmo
    - jak dostanu posloupnosti co generovat? Protože nechci totální náhodu.
        Použiju incipity z Primusu. (hypotéza: naučíme se language model)
            - odkaz: hypotézu otestujeme v experimentech

---

- Co je to RCNN síť
    - v čem je výhodná CTC loss (není třeba alignment)
    - Konkrétní architektura mojí sítě
- Reprezentace výstupu sítě **TODO: tohle rozepiš do detailu**
    - Inspirováno Primusem, ale drobné změny
    - proč agnostic a ne semantic
        - menší abeceda, jednodušší generátor mashcima
    - míň ukecaný než u primusu, aby se dalo lépe anotovat ručně - vizuelní podobnost
    - symetrické - pozice 0 je uprostřed
    - Co se generuje vs. co lze anotovat
    - Pitch information
    - Attachments
    - Jak lze rozšířit do budoucna (dynamika, akordy) ... tohle ale spíš do závěru tady jen odkaz
- Mashcima **TODO: tohle rozepiš do detailu**
    - sázení ručně psaných not pomocí symbolů z datasetu MUSCIMA++
    - proč? Mám málo dat vzhledem k tomu jak mohou být variabilní
    - cíl - co nejvíce napodobit vzhled dat v CVC-MUSCIMA
        - tzn. neřeším preprocessing a binarizaci
        - proč? Protože na něm budu testovat
    - popsat architekturu generátoru (třídy v pythonu), prostě dokumentace
        + nejen třídy, ale i jak funguje
    - problémy s rozlišením a max. délkou výstpu
- Experimenty
    - účel 1: jak dobrý je model co jsem udělal (evaluace)
    - účel 2: na jakých posloupnostech je nejlépe trénovat (primus / generated)
        + diskuze o language modelu vs. regularizaci
    - porovnej díla a porovnej writery - jak se liší mezi sebou v úspěšnosti
    - otestovat hypotézu dropout vrstvy (SimpleHTR ji nemá?, Calvo ji má)

Commit message:

Introduction to Music representation chapter

thesis-text.md, after:

# Some Links

Medvěd: https://mj.ucw.cz/vyuka/bc/

Hajič Jr. thesis proposal: http://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/~zabokrtsky/pgs/thesis_proposal/jan-hajic-jr-proposal.pdf
A Starting Point for Handwritten Music Recognition: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=SygqKLQrXQ
From Optical Music Recognition to Handwritten Music Recognition: A baseline: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0167865518303386
Handwritten Music Recognition for Mensural notation with convolutional recurrent neural networks: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0167865519302338

HTR (TU Wien): https://repositum.tuwien.ac.at/obvutwhs/download/pdf/2874742


# Abstract

Optical music recognition is a challenging field similar in many ways to optical text recognition. It brings, however, many challenges that traditional pipeline-based recognition systems struggle with. The end-to-end approach has proven to be superior in the domain of handwritten text recognition. We tried to apply this approach to the field of OMR. Specifically, we focused on handwritten music recognition. To resolve the lack of training data, we developed an engraving system for handwritten music called Mashcima. This engraving system is successful at mimicking the style of the CVC-MUSCIMA dataset. We evaluated our model on a portion of the CVC-MUSCIMA dataset and the approach seems to be promising.


# Introduction

> Co je OMR

Optical music recognition (OMR) is an interesting subfield of computer vision. It shares a lot of similarities to optical character recognition (OCR) and handwritten text recognition (HTR). It is, however, more challenging as is pointed out in the paper *Understanding Optical Music Recognition* (https://arxiv.org/pdf/1908.03608.pdf). For example in OCR, characters are read in one direction, typically from left to right. Musical symbols seem to be similar in that a staff is also read from left to right, but many symbols can be placed above each other. Piano scores can even have symbols that span multiple staves.

Although a musical score can be very complex, many scores are not. We can limit ourselves to scores that are monophonic, have a single voice and have symbols spanning only one staff. Monophonic scores lack chords, meaning there's only one note plaing at a time. This holds, for example, for windblown instruments, since they cannot play multiple notes simulatenously. Sometimes multiple voices (instruments) are engraved in a single staff to save space. We will not attempt to read these scores either. It would be like reading two lines of text simultaneously and the proposed model can output only a single sequence. Also deciding what voice a given note belongs to is in itself a complicated problem.

> v HTR se používá RCNN, protože je fajn (https://repositum.tuwien.ac.at/obvutwhs/download/pdf/2874742) nebo (http://www.jpuigcerver.net/pubs/jpuigcerver_icdar2017.pdf)
> Jednak, druhak jsem ji vybral, protože s ním mám zkušennosti, třeťak Calvo 2018 ji taky použil

Deep neural networks have transformed the field of computer vision recently. Especially convolutional networks (CNN), whose architecture is particularly well suited for image processing. Recurrent neural networks (RNN) have been used for sequence processing, like natural language modelling or natural language translation. We can combine these two architectures to create a so called RCNN network. When trained using connectionist temporal classification (CTC), we get a powerful architecture that is ideal for processing visual sequential data (http://www.jpuigcerver.net/pubs/jpuigcerver_icdar2017.pdf). This architecture has been used in handwritten text recognition to yield state-of-the-art results (https://repositum.tuwien.ac.at/obvutwhs/download/pdf/2874742).

> tuhle architekturu zkusil Calvo 2018 na primusu

If we limit the complexity of musical scores to the point that a single staff can be represented as a sequence of tokens, we can use this architecture to tackle to problem of OMR. This approach has been tried in 2018 by Calvo-Zaragoza and Rizo in 2018 (https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/8/4/606). They created the PrIMuS dataset, which contains 87678 real-music incipits. An incipit is the part of a melody or a musical work that is most recognizable for that work. Each incipit is a few measures long, typically shorter than a single staff of printed sheet music would be.

> primus je nice and all, ale je sázenej, jenže hodně not je ručně psanejch (to je ta díra co plním)

The resulting model has been compared against Audiveris, an open-source OMR tool (https://github.com/Audiveris), and has proven to be superior on the PrIMuS dataset. However the dataset contains printed images only. Since this RCNN architecture is an end-to-end approach, there's a great chance that it would be ideal for reading handwritten scores as well (drawing analogy from HTR).

> my tohle chceme zkusit na ručně psaných *The goal of this thesis is: ...*

Therefore the goal of this thesis is to explore the end-to-end approach for optical music recognition of handwritten music scores. More specifically we want to train a RCNN network to yield the best possible results on the CVC-MUSCIMA dataset.

> narazili jsme na nedostatek dat

We needed to obtain training data. We explored the *Collection of datasets for OMR* by Alexander Pacha (https://apacha.github.io/OMR-Datasets/) and quickly found out that the only dataset containing entire staves of handwritten sheet music is the CVC-MUSCIMA dataset (http://www.cvc.uab.es/cvcmuscima/index_database.html). Every other handwritten dataset contains only muscial symbols or is derived from CVC-MUSCIMA. Since CVC-MUSCIMA is intended for writer classification and staff removal, it contains only 20 parts, each written by 50 writers. That's far too small variability, given the task we are trying to solve.

> takže součástí práce je taky Mashcima

Facing this issue we resorted to data augmentation. The idea is to take handwritten musical symbols and place them onto an empty staff to create a new staff image. We called this music engraving system *Mashcima* and the system is explained in the chapter [M](#M). The muscial symbols used by Mashcima come from the MUSCIMA++ dataset (https://ufal.mff.cuni.cz/muscima). This dataset is built on top of CVC-MUSCIMA and provides pixel-perfect symbol segmentation and relationships between symbols. The reason we chose MUSCIMA++, instead of other musical symbol datasets, is that it is built on top of CVC-MUSCIMA. This means the image resolution and overall style is consistent with CVC-MUSCIMA. Also MUSCIMA++ has been developed at Charles University and so it was easy to contact its creator when needed. We however do make sure, that the final evaluation is performed on data the neural network has not seen during training. Specifically it trains on staves by completely different writers than the ones used for evaluation.

Mashcima engraving system is the main feature that sets this thesis apart from other works. Other people, when faced with the lack of training data, use simple data augentation (dilation, blurring, distortion) or transfer learning (https://openreview.net/pdf?id=SygqKLQrXQ). We belive that custom engraving system for hadwritten music is the best way to produce overabundance of high quality training data. Our confidence stems from the fact, that non-trained human has difficulties distinguishing a real-world sample from a well-engraved one.

    figure comparing one staff from CVC-MUSCIMA and one from PrIMuS, engraved using Mashcima

> jak práce dopadla - úspěch nebo ne?

It is difficult to evaluate an OMR system in general. This is because there is no standard dataset that can be used and no standard set of metrics. Moreover we proposed a new Mashcima representation for the music engraved in a staff. This representation is based on the agnostic encoding proposed by Calvo-Zaragoza and Rizo (https://grfia.dlsi.ua.es/primus/). Using custom representation makes it yet more difficult to compare our results to other works. That being said, we can still make some comparisons. It seems that having specialized engraving system is a step in the right direction. The results we obained when evaluating are comparable to simmilar works performing simmilar evaluation (https://openreview.net/pdf?id=SygqKLQrXQ).

> MusicXML nebylo implementováno
> Image preprocessing nebyl implementován, máme už binarizovaný vstup

The thesis assignment states that output of our model will be a MusicXML file. We quickly realized that the problem is far larger then anticipated and so we focused on the core features only. Similarly the model input is not a plain photo or scan. It is already preprocessed and binarized. This problem has already been solved during the creation of the CVC-MUSCIMA dataset (http://www.cvc.uab.es/cvcmuscima/index_database.html).


## Thesis outline

**Chapter X:** Proč end-to-end, proč RCNN+CTC, výhody, nevýhody, viz log - proces vymýšlení, vícekanálová CTC, problémy

**Chapter X:** Reprezentace výstupu sítě (Mashcima representation)

**Chapter X:** Engraving system Mashcima, jak funguje, jakou má strukturu

**Chapter X:** Experiments and results (jak vypadají experimenty, jak dopadly)


# Related Work

> TODO ... vypiš hlavní práce o které se opíráš a co zajímavého z nich používáš.

- SimpleHTR
- Calvo-Zaragoza and Rizo, PrIMuS
- CVC-MUSCIMA
- MUSCIMA++


# Deep Neural Network

> Tradiční systémy používají pipeline

> deep NN spojují celou pipeline do jednoho celku, learned features

> CTC umožňuje neřešit alignment, snazší anotace

> multi channel CTC attempts


# Music Representation

    - Inspirováno Primusem, ale drobné změny
    - proč agnostic a ne semantic
        - menší abeceda, jednodušší generátor mashcima
    - míň ukecaný než u primusu, aby se dalo lépe anotovat ručně - vizuelní podobnost
    - symetrické - pozice 0 je uprostřed
    - Co se generuje vs. co lze anotovat
    - Pitch information
    - Attachments
    - Jak lze rozšířit do budoucna (dynamika, akordy) ... tohle ale spíš do závěru tady jen odkaz

---

This chaptes explores how the music is represented within this thesis. It looks at the encodings devised for the PrIMuS dataset and how they have been modified to produce our Mashcima music encoding. Then we explore how this encoding can be used for annotating datasets and how it can be extended in the future.

All the encodings explored in this chapter are made for a model that produces a sequence of tokens. An encoding then defines a specific set of tokens and describes how they map onto the musical symbols. In the context of a neural network with a CTC loss function, we take all the tokens of an encoding and represent them as the individual classifier classes. How the tokens get indexed and how the blank symbol is represented is considered an implementation detail of the neural network and is not covered in the encoding specification.

We can provide a simple overview of the terms used in this chapter:
**Token** is a single item of the output sequence produced by a model.
**Vocabulary** is the set of all tokens in an encoding.
**Encoding** is a scheme for mapping musical staves onto a sequence of tokens.


## PrIMuS agnostic encoding

The PrIMuS dataset contains over 87 000 items, each with an image of the printed staff and then multiple files describing the music in that staff. There are two standard formats, namely Music Encoding Initiative format (MEI) and the Plaine and Easie code source. Then there are two on-purpouse encodings devised specifically for this dataset. These two encodings are what interests us.

    figure containing a sample incipit

The first of these two encodings is the *semantic encoding*. It represents what the musical symbols mean. Each symbol has a specific pitch that relies on the cleft at the begining of the staff. This makes the vocabulary much larger and any model using this encoding has take the clef into account when reading the symbols. It is however much easier to transform this encoding to some well known format like MusicXML, since these formats tend to represent the meaning of a score, not the score appearence.

    semantic encoding of the incipit above

The second encoding is the *agnostic encoding*. This encoding treats the staff visually as a specific positioning of specific symbols. It tries to capture what is in the staff visually, not what the symbols mean musically. This is comparable to a sentence being thought of as a sequence of letters, whereas the semantic encoding could be thought of as the specific sounds a written sentence represents. This makes the encoding harder to convert to a well known format acceptable by other music software. On the other hand this encoding is formal-enough to be easily converted to the semantic encoding, if read correctly. So this encoding lets the model do less work, therefore the model should do fewer mistakes.

    agnostic encoding of the incipit above

The agnostic encoding has also the advantage, that annotating an image is not as difficult for a human. Annotating an image using the semantic encoding requires the annotator to know pitches for a given key. The situation is even more complicated by key signatures. This means an untrained non-musician has to do a lot of thinking when annotating, which leads to many errors and slow annotation speed.

We've taken this agnostic encoding and modified it slightly to produce our Mashcima music representation.


## Mashcima music encoding


## Differences to PrIMuS


## Extensibility


# Engraving System


# Experiments and Results


# Conclusion and Future Works

> - rozšíření na akordy
> - rozšíření na dynamiku (mf, ff, pp, hairpins, ...)


# XXX `Content layout and notes`

V čem je end-to-end výhodné? (tzn. proč to vůbec prozkoumávám?)
- ručně vybraný fičury nebejvaj nejlepší, lepší je se interní fičury naučit
    (ideálně nějakej odkaz do Deep Leraning book na deep sítě)
- chyby v prvních fázích pipeline způsobují lavinový efekt chyb

Proč jsem zvolil RCNN+CTC? (jako konkrétní realizaci end-to-end modelu)
1) používá to SimpleHTR a od něho jsem se odpíchnul
2) díky CTC nemusím řešit alignment (segmentaci)
- z čeho jiného bych mohl vybírat?

Proč jsem zvolil CVC-MUSCIMA na evaluaci?
1) snadno lze anotovat, protože se díla opakují
2) z datasetů co jsou na výběr vyšel nejlíp https://apacha.github.io/OMR-Datasets/
    - je handwritten, obsahuje celé sheety, mám k němu MUSCIMA++ na symboly
    - je to jediný single-staff handwritten na výběr, ostatní na něm staví
        nebo to jsou pouze datasety symbolů

Na čem trénovat model?
- CVC-MUSCIMA nestačí, moc malý, malá variabilita
- žádný jiný na výber není
- použiju augmentaci dat -> vygeneruju nová data přeházením symoblů z CVC-MUSCIMY
    - jak dostanu symboly? Ty už mám v MUSCIMA++, použiju tu
    - dostanu anotace zadarmo
    - jak dostanu posloupnosti co generovat? Protože nechci totální náhodu.
        Použiju incipity z Primusu. (hypotéza: naučíme se language model)
            - odkaz: hypotézu otestujeme v experimentech

---

- Co je to RCNN síť
    - v čem je výhodná CTC loss (není třeba alignment)
    - Konkrétní architektura mojí sítě
- Reprezentace výstupu sítě **TODO: tohle rozepiš do detailu**
    - Inspirováno Primusem, ale drobné změny
    - proč agnostic a ne semantic
        - menší abeceda, jednodušší generátor mashcima
    - míň ukecaný než u primusu, aby se dalo lépe anotovat ručně - vizuelní podobnost
    - symetrické - pozice 0 je uprostřed
    - Co se generuje vs. co lze anotovat
    - Pitch information
    - Attachments
    - Jak lze rozšířit do budoucna (dynamika, akordy) ... tohle ale spíš do závěru tady jen odkaz
- Mashcima **TODO: tohle rozepiš do detailu**
    - sázení ručně psaných not pomocí symbolů z datasetu MUSCIMA++
    - proč? Mám málo dat vzhledem k tomu jak mohou být variabilní
    - cíl - co nejvíce napodobit vzhled dat v CVC-MUSCIMA
        - tzn. neřeším preprocessing a binarizaci
        - proč? Protože na něm budu testovat
    - popsat architekturu generátoru (třídy v pythonu), prostě dokumentace
        + nejen třídy, ale i jak funguje
    - problémy s rozlišením a max. délkou výstpu
- Experimenty
    - účel 1: jak dobrý je model co jsem udělal (evaluace)
    - účel 2: na jakých posloupnostech je nejlépe trénovat (primus / generated)
        + diskuze o language modelu vs. regularizaci
    - porovnej díla a porovnej writery - jak se liší mezi sebou v úspěšnosti
    - otestovat hypotézu dropout vrstvy (SimpleHTR ji nemá?, Calvo ji má)
